# DKA_Calc
A DKA orderset calculator based on standard lab values. ~ Research/educational purposes only

Title: Verification of a Programed Diabetic Ketoacidosis Initial Order Calculator: A Preliminary Validation Study. 
Authors: Tanner Dean D.O., Tristan Alfie MS4, Robert Badgett M.D.

Introduction:
In 2009 the American Diabetes Association (ADA) adopted a treatment algorithm outlined by Kitabchi et al.(1) for the treatment and monitoring of hospitalized patients with diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA). The ADA algorithm uses patient laboratory values for the treatment and monitoring of patients with DKA. This study seeks to answer if a newly programmed DKA calculator can reproduce an order set obtained by following the ADA algorithm.

Methods:
The novel calculator was programmed using the coding language Python in the Juptyer Notebook environment by one of the researchers. The ADA algorithm provided the content for the calculator. The calculator was programmed to generate outputs: diagnosis of DKA, initial fluids (normal saline, half-normal saline, dextrose in water, or bicarbonate in water), whether or not to give insulin, and if supplemental potassium is needed. Thirteen theoretical patients (labs similar to actual patients) with the diagnosis of DKA or hyperglycemia had their initial labs recorded. One author entered the lab values into the programmed calculator while another used the ADA algorithm to determine the initial orders manually. The orders generated by these two methods were then compared for accuracy and preliminary validation.  

Results:
The patient set included 13 total patients. 8 patients with DKA and 5 patients with hyperglycemia. The calculator was able to match the manually obtained orders for the diagnosis of DKA 8 out of 8 times while being able to diagnosis hyperglycemia without DKA 5 out of 5 times. The calculator matched the manual algorithm for initial orders for the DKA patients 8 out of 8 times. Furthermore, the calculator was able to provide additional information to guide management such as if the anion gap was opened or closed.  

Conclusion: 
This study shows that a programmed calculator can be useful in following the defined medical algorithm for the treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis. However, this calculator needs to be further validated for large-scale applications. Besides preliminary validation, this study also shows how individual coded tools, based on defined treatment algorithms, can be used for individualized clinical practice.

References
1: American Diabetes Association. "Diagnosis and classification of diabetes mellitus." Diabetes care 32.Supplement 1 (2009): S62-S67.
